---
title: "Constructor vs ngOnInit in Angular"
description: ""
tags: [angular, angular-lifecycle-events]
categories: [front-end development]
date: 2021-02-08T17:38:00-06:00
author: Alberto Garza
draft: true
---

There's probably nothing more important than the initial state of a component. This defines how the component will look like at first and from which state it will start. There's also sometimes confusion as to whether the constructor or the ngOnInit method should be used to initialize state in an Angular component. Here I will attempt to contribute a few guidelines to move forward.

Let's begin with the definition of the constructor in TypeScript.

> Class constructors are very similar to functions. You can add parameters with type annotations, default values, and overloads
>
> There are just a few differences between class constructor signatures and function signatures:
>
> * Constructors can’t have type parameters - these belong on the outer class declaration, which we’ll learn about later
> * Constructors can’t have return type annotations - the class instance type is always what’s returned
> 
> *Source: https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/classes.html#constructors*

Constructors are keywords that behave like a method that only get called once when you create a new instance of a class by using the `new` keyword. Once the instance of the class has been created, there is no way you may call the constructor again for the same instance.

And now let's take a look at the definition of the ngOnInit method in Angular.

The `ngOnInit` method in Angular is one of many lifecycle event hooks which comes from the `OnInit` interface. 

> The purpose of the `ngOnInit` lifecycle hook is to "initialize the directive or component after Angular first displays the data-bound properties and sets the directive or component's input properties."
> It is "called once, after the first `ngOnChanges()`." 
>
> *Source: https://angular.io/guide/lifecycle-hooks#lifecycle-event-sequence*

Considering these definitions, we can see they have a lot of things in common:
* They only get called once.

And that's it! 😃

Now let's consider what their differences are:
* Dependency Injection (DI) can only happen in a constructor. That's what Angular uses to determine the needed providers to pass in. ngOnInit cannot be injected a provider at all.
* Data from an @Input decorator will only be available in an ngOnInit method. This data won't be available in a constructor no matter how hard you try. The reason for this is that Angular lifecycle hooks are only called based on change detection, which in turn only happens after the component tree has been constructed, meaning all the constructor methods in all the components involved have been called.

In conclusion, it seems to me that a good rule of thumb is as follows:
 
> You use the constructor for dependency injection and `ngOnInit` for everything else.

I have spoken it (or typed it)!
